---
editor_options:
  markdown:
    wrap: 72
---

# Practical 2 {.unnumbered}

::: file
For the tasks below, you will require the **Boston** dataset. This
dataset is part of the `MASS` R package.

To access the dataset, load the `MASS` package (install the package
first, if you have not done so previously).
:::

### Task 1 {.unnumbered}

Install and load the `MASS` package. You will also require `tidyverse`.

::: question
Does R provide any message when loading `MASS`? Why does this matter?
:::

### Task 2 {.unnumbered}

Find out more about the `Boston` dataset variables by accessing the R
Documentation.

To explore the `Boston` dataset, simply type the name of the data object
into the console or use `View()`

::: question
What type of data structure is the `Boston` dataset? What are its
dimensions? How many categorical and quantitative variables are there?
:::

### Task 3 {.unnumbered}

Find the class of all 14 variables. Hint: use `sapply`.

### Task 4 {.unnumbered}

Using a `tidyverse` approach, calculate the mean, median, and standard
deviation of all variables of class *numeric*.

::: question
What is the mean pupil-teacher ratio? What is the median and mean per
capita crime rate? Which value do you think is more suitable to describe
per capita crime rate?
:::

### Task 5 {.unnumbered}

Using a base R approach, create a 2x2 multipanel plot of `crim` versus
`age`, `dis`, `rad`, `tax` and `ptratio`.

::: question
What can you say about the relationships between `age`, `dis`, `rad`,
`tax`, and `crim`?
:::

### Task 6 {.unnumbered}

Using a base R approach, create and display histograms of `crim`, `tax`
and `ptratio` in a 1x2 multipanel plot. Set the `breaks` argument to
**25** .

::: question
What do these histograms indicate?
:::

