---
editor_options:
  markdown:
    wrap: 72
---

# Practical 2 {.unnumbered}

::: file
For the tasks below, you will require the **Carseats** dataset from the
core textbook (James et. al 2021).

This dataset is part of the `ISRL2` package. By loading the package, the
**Carseats** dataset loads automatically:

`library(ISLR2)`
:::

**Carseats** is a simulated dataset comprising of sales of child car seats at 400 different stores. It is a datafrate with 400 observations and 11 variables. The variables are:

-   Sales: Unit sales (thousands of dollars) at each location\
-   CompPrice: Price charged by competitor at each location\
-   Income: Community income level (thousands of dollars)\
-   Advertising: Local advertising budget for company at each location
    (thousands of dollars)\
-   Population: Population size in region (thousands of dollars)\
-   Price: Price company charges for car seats at each site\
-   ShelveLoc: Quality of the shelving location for the car seats at
    each site\
-   Age: Average age of the local population\
-   Education: Education level at each location\
-   Urban: Whether the store is in an urban or rural location\
-   US: Whether the store is in the US or not

## Task 1 {.unnumbered}

Fit a multiple regression model to predict unit sales at each location
based on price company charges for car seats, whether the store is in an
urban or rural location, and whether the store is in the US or not.

## Task 2 {.unnumbered}

Have a look at the results and interpret the coefficients.

::: question
Which coefficients are statistically significant? What do they indicate?
:::

## Task 3 {.unnumbered}

Based on the conclusions you have drawn in Task 2, now fit a smaller
model that only uses the predictors for which there is evidence of
association with sales.

## Task 4 {.unnumbered}

Compare the two models (*fit* and *fit2*).

::: question
Which model is the better fit?
:::

## Task 5 {.unnumbered}

Produce diagnostic plots for *fit2* and display these in a 2x2 grid.

::: question
Is there evidence of outliers or high leverage observations in the
*fit2* model?
:::

