---
editor_options:
  markdown:
    wrap: 72
---

# Practical 1 {.unnumbered}

::: file
For the tasks below, you will require the **Auto** dataset from the core
textbook (James et. al 2021).

This dataset is part of the `ISRL2` package. By loading the package, the
**Auto** dataset loads automatically:

`library(ISLR2)`
:::

The **Auto** dataset contains information such as engine horsepower, gas mileage, model year, and origin of car, for 392 vehicles. It is a dataframe with 392 observations and 9 variables. The variables are:

-   mpg: miles per gallon
-   cylinders: Number of cylinders between 4 and 8
-   displacement: Engine displacement (cu. inches)
-   horsepower: Engine horsepower
-   weight: Vehicle weight (lbs.)
-   acceleration: Time to accelerate from 0 to 60 mph (sec.)
-   year: Model year
-   origin: Origin of car (1. American, 2. European, 3. Japanese)
-   name: Vehicle name

### Task 1 {.unnumbered}

Use the `lm()` function to perform simple linear regression with **mpg**
as the response and **horsepower** as the predictor. Store the output in
an object called **fit**.

### Task 2 {.unnumbered}

Have a look at the results of the model.

::: question
Is there a relationship between the predictor and the response?
:::

### Task 3 {.unnumbered}

What is the associated 95% confidence intervals for predicted miles per
gallon associated with an engine horsepower of 98? Hint: use the
`predict()` function. For confidence intervals, set the `interval`
argument to `confidence`.

### Task 4 {.unnumbered}

How about the prediction interval for the same value?

::: question
Are the two intervals different? Why?
:::

### Task 5 {.unnumbered}

Using base R, plot the response and the predictor as well as the least
squares regression line. Add suitable labels to the X and Y axes.

### Task 6 {.unnumbered}

Use base R to produce diagnostic plots of the least squares regression
fit. Display these in a 2X2 grid.

### Task 7 {.unnumbered}

Subset the **Auto** dataset such that it excludes the **name** and
**origin** variables and store this subsetted dataset in a new object
called **quant_vars**.

### Task 8 {.unnumbered}

Compute a correlation matrix of all variables.

::: question
Did you use the **Auto** dataset or the **quant_vars** object? Why does
it matter which data object you use?
:::

### Task 9 {.unnumbered}

Using the **quant_vars** object, perform multiple linear regression with
miles per gallon as the response and all other variables as the
predictors.

Store the results in an object called **fit2**.

### Task 10 {.unnumbered}

Have a look at the results of the multiple regression model.

::: question
Is there a relationship between the predictors and the response? Which
predictors appear to have a statistically significant relationship to
the response? What does the coefficient for the year variable suggest?
:::

### Task 11 {.unnumbered}

Produce diagnostic plots of the multiple linear regression fit in a 2x2
grid.

::: question
Do the residual plots suggest any unusually large outliers? Does the
leverage plot identify any observations with unusually high leverage?
:::

### Task 12 {.unnumbered}

Fit separate linear regression models with interaction effect terms for:
weight and horsepower, acceleration and horsepower, and cylinders and
weight.

::: question
Are any of the interaction terms statistically significant?
:::

### Task 13 {.unnumbered}

Using the **Auto** data object, apply transformations for the
**horsepower** variable and plot the relationship between **horsepower**
and **mpg** in a 2x2 grid.

-   First plot: use the original variable;\
-   Second plot: apply log transform;\
-   Third plot: raise it to the power of two.

::: question
Which of these transformations is most suitable?
:::

### Task 14 {.unnumbered}

Now run a multiple regression model with all variables as before but
this time, apply a log transformation of the **horsepower** variable.

### Task 15 {.unnumbered}

Have a look at the results.

::: question
How do the results of model **fit3** differ from those of model
**fit2**?
:::

### Task 16 {.unnumbered}

Produce diagnostic plots for the **fit3** object and display them in a
2x2 grid.

::: question
How do the diagnostic plots differ?
:::
