# (PART\*) Section 1 {.unnumbered}

# Overview {.unnumbered}

::: {style="color: #333; font-size: 24px; font-style: italic; text-align: justify;"}
Section 1: Introduction to Data Science: The Basics of Statistical Learning
:::

# Quiz 

## Question 1: Flexible and Inflexible Methods

For each of parts (a) through (d), indicate whether we would generally expect the performance of a flexible statistical learning method to be better or worse than an inflexible method. Justify your answer.

(a) The sample size n is extremely large, and the number of predictors p is small.**

A: better - a more flexible approach will fit the data closer and with the large sample size a better fit than an inflexible approach would be obtained.

(b) The number of predictors p is extremely large, and the number of observations n is small. 

A: worse - a flexible method can cause overfit the small number of observations.So the overfitting model will result in a bigger inflation in variance and a small reduction in bias.

(c) The relationship between the predictors and response is highly non-linear.

A: better - with more degrees of freedom, a flexible model would obtain a better fit. A flexible model is better to find the non-linear effect. 

(d) The variance of the error terms is extremely high.

A: worse - flexible methods would fit too much of the noise resulting from the large variance of the errors. 

**Note:** 
**1.Fitting a more flexible model requires estimating a greater number of parameters.**

**2.The guideline of using flexible and inflexible model**

- Good at finding non-linear (complex) behavior.

- With large sample sizes, there is less tendency for overfitting however, there is a susceptibility to noise.

- There is tendency for reduced bias.

- Communicating model behavior may be challenging.

## Question 2: Regression and Classification Problems

For each one of the scenarios below (a to c): 

- indicate whether the scenario is a *classification* or *regression* problem;  
- indicate whether we are most interested in inference or prediction;   
- provide the sample size (n);  
- list the inputs/independent variables (p).  


(a) We collect a set of data on the top 500 firms in the US. For each firm we record profit, number of employees, industry and the CEO salary. We are interested in understanding which factors affect CEO salary.  

A: regression. inference. quantitative output of CEO salary based on CEO firm's features.

n - 500 firms in the US

p - profit, number of employees, industry

(b) We are considering launching a new product and wish to know whether it will be a success or a failure. We collect data on 20 similar products that were previously launched. For each product we have recorded whether it was a success or failure, price charged for the product, marketing budget, competition price,and ten other variables.  

A: classification. prediction. predicting new product's success or failure.

n - 20 similar products previously launched

p - price charged, marketing budget, comp. price, ten other variables


(c) We are interest in predicting the % change in the USD/Euro ed exchange rate in relation to the weekly changes in the world stock markets. Hence we collect weekly data for all of 2012. Foreach week we record the % change in the USD/Euro, the % change in the US market, the % change in the British market, and the % change in the German market.  

A: regression. prediction. quantitative output of % change

n - 52 weeks of 2012 weekly data

p - % change in US market, % change in British market, % change in German market


## Question 3: Flexibility in Regression and Classification

What are the advantages and disadvantages of a very flexible (versus a less flexible) approach for regression or classification? Under what circumstances might a more flexible approach be preferred to a less flexible approach? When might a less flexible approach be preferred?

*Flexible approaches*
**The advantages**:1)obtaining a better fit for non-linear models; 2)decreasing the error (bias).

**The disadvantages**: 1)requires estimating a greater number of parameters;2)follow the noise too closely (overfit);3)increasing variance.

The pros and cons for inflexible approaches are the opposite. 

**When the flexible approach is preferrable**: when we are interested in prediction and not the interpretability of the results. lots of data and many different groups

**When the inflexible approach is preferrable**: when we are interested in inference and the interpretability of the results.few data points

**Note**

1.For classification, an approach can be both flexible and less flexible. 
highly flexible - Training MSE is low here but test MSE is high, resulting in high variance. 
less flexible - lower variance but higher bias. 

2.How to balance the flexibility? 
Using cross validation methods.


## Question 4: parametric and Non-parametric Methods

Describe the differences between a parametric and a non-parametric statistical learning approach. What are the advantages of a parametric approach to regression or classification (as opposed to a non-parametric approach)? What are its disadvantages?

**A parametric approach** reduces the problem of estimating f down to one of estimating a set of parameters because it assumes a form for f.

**A non-parametric approach** does not assume a functional form for f and so requires a very large number of observations to accurately estimate f.

**The advantages of a parametric approach to regression or classification** are the simplifying of modeling f to a few parameters and not as many observations are required compared to a non-parametric approach.

**The disadvantages of a parametric approach to regression or classification** are a potential to inaccurately estimate f if the form of f assumed is wrong or to overfit the observations if more flexible models are used.

**Note: f = the population**

# Practical 
